frc(0069): change v2 piece multihashes to enable arbitrarily sized data (#808)
filecoin-project/FIPs: FRCs/frc-0069.md

> ## Simple Summary

Reviewer: Regardless of which version of the Simple Summary is merged by the author, can we add a few extra words about why this alternative CID representation is being introduced? What functionality or improvement does it support?

> Introduces an alternative CID representation for the FR32 padded sha256-trunc254-padded binary merkle trees used in Filecoin Piece Commitments (i.e. CommP). In it we use the [Raw codec](https://github.com/multiformats/multicodec/blob/566eaf857a9d20573d3910221db7b34d98e8a0fc/table.csv#L41) and a new [sha2-256-trunc254-padded-binary-tree multihash (or piece multihash)](https://github.com/multiformats/multicodec/pull/331) rather than the [Fil-commitment-unsealed codec](https://github.com/multiformats/multicodec/blob/566eaf857a9d20573d3910221db7b34d98e8a0fc/table.csv#L517) and the [sha2-256-trunc254-padded multihash](https://github.com/multiformats/multicodec/blob/566eaf857a9d20573d3910221db7b34d98e8a0fc/table.csv#L149).

Reviewer 2: I'm not eager to change lib names but ok if it's a must. publishing packages with last name triggered npm's spam filter so I had to email etc... I suspect same will happen with this name also.

> This makes it much more natural to work with new concepts like [Deal Aggregates](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/filecoin-project/go-data-segment@v0.0.0-20230605095649-5d01fdd3e4a1/datasegment#NewAggregate), as proposed in [FRC-0058](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/7e499523c9c7ed2c48c6a36967f7f011cee1fefd/FRCs/frc-0058.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The proposed V2 multihash makes it easier to work with new concepts like [Deal Aggregates](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/filecoin-project/go-data-segment@v0.0.0-20230605095649-5d01fdd3e4a1/datasegment#NewAggregate), as proposed in [FRC-0058](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/7e499523c9c7ed2c48c6a36967f7f011cee1fefd/FRCs/frc-0058.md).
```

Reviewer: Nit, but the use of the word "concepts" in the above sentence could also benefit from specification. Is it possible to do so? Perhaps "unstructured", "variably sized" or "large" data, etc., whatever is/may be accurate.

> To resolve this we introduce a new multihash type [fr32-sha2-256-trunc254-padded-binary-tree multihash](https://link.tld) which combines the root hash with the tree height and the amount of padding of the data with zeros such that the result is a full and balanced binary tree after the fr32 padding is applied. For Piece commitments the amount of added padding is zero.

Author: I was trying to draw some distinction between:
1. Piece commitment -> the thing Filecoin consensus proves that you have (i.e. all the data including the padding)
2. Hashing the data using the specific set of machinery used in piece commitments (e.g. leaves are fr32 padded and it's a balanced binary tree)

Maybe this wasn't the best distinction. Any idea how to best state that if you try and take the digests used in Filecoin commitments/consensus (e.g. the v1 piece CIDs used in https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/filecoin-project/go-state-types/abi#PieceInfo) then they have no padding after conversion to v2 piece CIDs since they've already been padded (absent any off-chain information telling you how they might've been padded).

> To resolve this we introduce a new multihash type [fr32-sha2-256-trunc254-padded-binary-tree multihash](https://link.tld) which combines the root hash with the tree height and the amount of padding of the data with zeros such that the result is a full and balanced binary tree after the fr32 padding is applied. For Piece commitments the amount of added padding is zero.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To resolve this we introduce a new multihash type [fr32-sha2-256-trunc254-padded-binary-tree multihash](https://link.tld) which combines the root hash with the tree height and the amount of padding of the data with zeros such that the result is a full and balanced binary tree after the fr32 padding is applied. If this multihash were to be used to reference the full piece as understood by the on-chain consensus mechanism, this would involve the special case where the padding is zero is used.
```

Seems that you're trying to tread a careful path here because lower down in the original form of this doc you have:

> this is not a FIP for changing how CommPs are stored or used on chain, but rather a more user-friendly way of referencing Pieces which can be used in various non-chain interactions (e.g. piece-based retrieval, smart contract interactions, etc.).

I wonder if there could be some more work nuancing these points a bit more. ISTM that this could be an alternate on-chain CID too, there could potentially be a world in which consensus involves optionally understanding both forms of CID; maybe even with a migration toward a "v1". This point goes for both the original FRC text and this updated one I think.

> To resolve this we introduce a new multihash type [fr32-sha2-256-trunc254-padded-binary-tree multihash](https://link.tld) which combines the root hash with the tree height and the amount of padding of the data with zeros such that the result is a full and balanced binary tree after the fr32 padding is applied. For Piece commitments the amount of added padding is zero.

Author: I think this could be used within consensus if we wanted to. However, I figured that's a discussion for another time. I didn't want to end up in a situation where the process to get this FRC agreed upon and landed slowed down even more due to concerns about the complexity of a migration, what the state size will look like, ...

If you'd like to add text in there about this I'm fine with that, I just left it out to try and reduce potential confusion.

> To resolve this we introduce a new multihash type [fr32-sha2-256-trunc254-padded-binary-tree multihash](https://link.tld) which combines the root hash with the tree height and the amount of padding of the data with zeros such that the result is a full and balanced binary tree after the fr32 padding is applied. For Piece commitments the amount of added padding is zero.

Author: ```suggestion
To resolve this we introduce a new multihash type [fr32-sha2-256-trunc254-padded-binary-tree multihash](https://link.tld) which combines the root hash with the tree height and the amount of padding of the data with zeros such that the result is a full and balanced binary tree after the fr32 padding is applied. If this multihash were to be used to reference the full piece as understood by the Filecoin on-chain consensus mechanism, this would involve the special case where the padding is zero is used.
```

@rvagg I liked your suggestion, I just modified it slightly.

> To resolve this we introduce a new multihash type [fr32-sha2-256-trunc254-padded-binary-tree multihash](https://github.com/multiformats/multicodec/pull/331) which combines the root hash with the tree height and the amount of padding of the data with zeros such that the result is a full and balanced binary tree after the fr32 padding is applied. If this multihash were to be used to reference the full piece as understood by the Filecoin on-chain consensus mechanism, this would involve the special case where a padding of zero is used.

Reviewer 2: I'm failing to understand the last sentence, what is that special case ? I think it would be a good idea if this was clear to someone like me who's not well versed in filecoin on-chain consensus mechanism or we simple have not mentioned it.

Author: Perhaps a fun fact: Switching from a v1 piece CID to a v2 one (i.e. assuming zero padding) results in a piece CID that is exactly the same size.
- v1: `<0x01><codec = 3 bytes as varint><multihash = 2 bytes as varint><mh-digest-len = 1 byte><digest = 32 bytes> = 39 bytes`
- v2: `<0x01><codec = 1 byte as varint><multihash = 2 bytes as varint><mh-digest-len=1 byte><padding=0x00><height = 1 byte><root-hash = 32 bytes> = 39 bytes`

Reviewer 2: @ribasushi I think you meant "hash payload" and not "hashed payload" right ?

Reviewer 4: > @ribasushi I think you meant "hash payload" and not "hashed payload" right ?

I meant `hashed payload`: the data (payload) that is to be hashed. We can switch to `hashed data`, it sounds clunkier to me...

> struct can be losslessly expressed as a PieceCIDv2 with the padding value set to 0 

`s/losslessly/fully/` ?

The core component introduce in this specification is a new multihash type fr32-sha2-256-trunc254-padded-binary-tree multihash.

The multihash code for this type is 0x1011 as identified in the [multicodec code table](https://github.com/multiformats/multicodec/pull/331).

The digest for the multihash is a variable number of bytes.

It can be roughly described as `uvarint padding | uint8 height | 32 byte root data` where `|` means concatenation.

- The first bytes are a [uvarint](https://github.com/multiformats/unsigned-varint) of the number of bytes needed to pad the underlying data such that after FR32 padding it will be a full binary tree

>     - If the data is < 127 bytes then it is padded to 127 bytes. For example, if the data is of size 12 the padding will be `127-12 = 115` 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Due to the fr32 expansion mechanism, **if the input data size is < 127 bytes then it is padded to a size of 127 bytes**. For example, if the data is of size 12 the padding will be `127-12 = 115` 

```

> - The first bytes are a [uvarint](https://github.com/multiformats/unsigned-varint) of the number of bytes needed to pad the underlying data such that after FR32 padding it will be a full binary tree
>     - If the data is < 127 bytes then it is padded to 127 bytes. For example, if the data is of size 12 the padding will be `127-12 = 115` 

Reviewer 4: - it's not padding, padding implies byte-work, fr32 is not that...
- 

```suggestion
- The first bytes are a [uvarint](https://github.com/multiformats/unsigned-varint) of the number of `0x00` bytes needed to pad the underlying data such that after FR32 expansion it will be a fully balanced binary tree. Due to the fr32 expansion mechanism, **if the input data size is < 127 bytes then it is padded to a size of 127 bytes**. That is, a CID with a certain padding value of `P` and a certain height (see next section) `H`, encodes an initial payload size of `( 1 << (H-2) ) * 127 - P`
    - For example, if the data is of size 12 the padding will be `127-12 = 115` 

```

Reviewer 2: For what it's worth I think formula should be `(2 ^ (H-2)) * 127 - P` I know it's the same, but this version does not require you to mentally do the translation.

    - For example, if the data is of size 254 (i.e. 2^i * 127/128, where i is a positive integer >= 7) then this will be 0
    - For example, if the data is of size 256 then the padding is `508-256=252`
    - Note: because the unsigned-varint spec currently has a maximum representable size of 2^63-1 (and 9 bytes to represent the varint) this puts a cap on the maximum size of data representable by this multihash as well

>     - Note: because this is padding data it must be less than the size of the underlying data (with the exception of data less than 127 bytes which is always padded up to 127 bytes)

Reviewer 4: Given the `( 1 << (H-2) ) * 127 - P` formula, is this sentence even needed...?

- The next byte defines the height of the tree

>     - For example if the first byte is 0 the tree is a single 32-byte leaf

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    - For example if the first byte is 0 the tree is a single 32-byte node

```

>     - Similarly, if the first byte is 30 then the tree is 30 levels deep which, since the leaves must be 32 bytes, represents a piece of size 32*2^30 bytes = 32GiB. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    - Similarly, if the first byte is 30 then the tree is 30 levels deep which, since all nodes used by this hash are 32 bytes long, represents a piece of size 32*2^30 bytes = 32GiB. 

```

The multihash code for this type is 0x1011 as identifier in the [multicodec code table](https://link.tld).

The digest for the multihash is a variable number of bytes.
- The first byte defines the height of the tree
    - For example if the first byte is 0 the tree is a single 32-byte leaf
    - Similarly, if the first byte is 30 then the tree is 30 levels deep which, since the leaves must be 32 bytes, represents a piece of size 32*2^30 bytes = 32GiB.

> - The next bytes are a [uvarint](https://github.com/multiformats/unsigned-varint) of the number of bytes needed to pad the underlying data such that after FR32 padding it will be a full binary tree

Author: While it would be more natural to instead of encoding `height | padding` to just encode `data size` a nice feature of this approach is that it decreases the size of the CIDs of all full trees (e.g. CC sectors, prepadded data in existing places on the chain where the PieceInfo abstraction is used) and makes them more uniform (i.e. they all have padding of zero). This approach was recommended by Mikeal Rogers.

I don't feel strongly about this though if people would prefer something else like encoding the size, or using a different more compact representation of the size information.

>     - If the data is < 127 bytes then it is padded to 127 bytes. For example, if the data is of size 12 the padding will be `127-12 = 115` (TODO: Is this necessary or would even 32 bytes be ok?)

Author: I'm not sure whether the minimum size here should be 31 bytes or 127 bytes. My understanding is that fr32 padding is defined only on data > 127 bytes and so we should pad up to 127, but I'm not confident that that's correct.

cc @Kubuxu

Author: As I understand that 65 (and probably this could've been 64) is saying:
1. 128 bytes is the smallest tree I'll deal with
2. I don't want to answer the question about what happen with the next smallest size tree (64 bytes)
3. So 65 (really 64 I think) is the smallest since it will (after fr32 padding) exceed 64 bytes and have to round up to 128

The question is if we want to loosen this to something else like:
1. If <127 bytes pad the data up to 127 (i.e. a single byte is allowed but it means it comes with 126 zeros)
   - i.e. Stick with 128 as the minimum tree size and define what happens below 64 bytes
2. If <`Smaller` (don't think smaller than 31/32 is possible here) then pad up to `Smaller` 
   - i.e. Choose a different minimum tree size

IIUC the "rule" for the tree construction is that each leaf node must be an fr32 element which can be guaranteed if the last two bits of each 32 byte node are zero. If so then even a single byte can be padded out to 32 bytes and used as a node.

Reviewer 3: My original understanding when we were working out CommP-as-a-CID was that 256 was the minimum, it was always explained to me as "2 extra bits per 254"; but we now live in this 126+1 world, which seems to be convenient from a calculation perspective, but does that have any implications for lower bound? So some clarity about what's actually required would be neat.

Reviewer 3: (the `sha2-256-trunc254` bit came from this btw, the extra `00` hole at the end of each sha2-256 digest / chunk)

    - For example, if the data is of size 254 (i.e. 2^i * 127/128, where i is a positive integer >= 7) then this will be 0
    - For example, if the data is of size 256 then the padding is `508-256=252`

>     - Note: because the unsigned-varint spec currently has a maximum representable size of 2^63-1 (and 9 bytes to represent the varint) this puts a cap on the maximum size of data representable by this multihash as well

Author: While we don't strictly need to follow the unsigned-varint spec here and have a maximum size it seems like a pretty reasonable thing to do. Any disagreement?

Reviewer 2: I don't think we deal with such large payloads so we're probably ok, but probably good to confirm with @ribasushi if that could be an issue elsewhere

Reviewer 4: If your PieceCid describes something larger than 63 bits ( 8 EiB ), then the "actual payload size" becomes meaningless anyway, and you are in world with padding of `0` and height up to 127, which is about 1<<132 or... many many **many** [HellaBytes](https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hellabyte)

> 

Reviewer 4: Making a note about line 69: `being able to convert between v1 and v2 Piece CIDs`: one **can not** do that. You can downgrade a v2 to V1+Size, but as written it implies one can up-cast a V1 to a V2, like you can do a CidV0 to CidV1, which... nope.

## Test Cases

Take data of size 127*4 bytes where the first 127 bytes are 0, the next 127 are 1, the next 127 are 2, and the last 127 are 3. The v1 piece CID of this data would be `baga6ea4seaqes3nobte6ezpp4wqan2age2s5yxcatzotcvobhgcmv5wi2xh5mbi`. The multihash-based piece CID would be `bafkzcibcaaces3nobte6ezpp4wqan2age2s5yxcatzotcvobhgcmv5wi2xh5mbi`. With a base16 multibase this would be `f01559120220004496dae0cc9e265efe5a006e80626a5dc5c409e5d3155c13984caf6c8d5cfd605` or equivalently (`(multibase = f) | (CIDv1 prefix = 0x01) | (Raw codec = 0x55) | (fr32-sha2-256-trunc254-padded-binary-tree multihash encoded varint = 0x9120) | (length of digest = 0x22) | (amount of data padding = 0x00) | (tree height = 0x04) | (underlying hash digest = 496...605)`)

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Take payload of size 0 bytes. There MUST be `127` bytes of padding. The v2 piece CID MUST be `bafkzcibcp4bdomn3tgwgrh3g532zopskstnbrd2n3sxfqbze7rxt7vqn7veigmy`.

Take payload of 127 bytes where all bytes are 0. There MUST be `0` bytes of padding. The hight MUST be `2`. The v2 piece CID MUST be `bafkzcibcaabdomn3tgwgrh3g532zopskstnbrd2n3sxfqbze7rxt7vqn7veigmy`.

Take payload of 128 bytes where all bytes are 0. There MUST be `126` bytes of padding. The height MUST be `3`. The v2 piece CID MUST be `bafkzcibcpybwiktap34inmaex4wbs6cghlq5i2j2yd2bb2zndn5ep7ralzphkdy`
```

Given the piece CID v1 of the empty 32 GiB piece (i.e. 32 * 2^30 * 127/128 bytes of zeros)`baga6ea4seaqao7s73y24kcutaosvacpdjgfe5pw76ooefnyqw4ynr3d2y6x2mpq` the corresponding mutlihash piece CID would be `bafkzcibcaapao7s73y24kcutaosvacpdjgfe5pw76ooefnyqw4ynr3d2y6x2mpq`

Given the piece CID v1 of the empty 64 GiB piece (i.e. 64 * 2^30 * 127/128 bytes of zeros)`baga6ea4seaqomqafu276g53zko4k23xzh4h4uecjwicbmvhsuqi7o4bhthhm4aq` the corresponding piece mutlihash piece CID would be `bafkzcibcaap6mqafu276g53zko4k23xzh4h4uecjwicbmvhsuqi7o4bhthhm4aq`

Take data of size 127*8 bytes where the first where the first 127 bytes are 0, the next 127 are 1, the next 127 are 2, the next 127 are 3 and the remaining `127*4` bytes are 0. There is no padding so the v1 piece CID would be `baga6ea4seaqn42av3szurbbscwuu3zjssvfwbpsvbjf6y3tukvlgl2nf5rha6pa` and the v2 would be `bafkzcibcauan42av3szurbbscwuu3zjssvfwbpsvbjf6y3tukvlgl2nf5rha6pa`.

> Take data of size 128*4 bytes where the first where the first 127 bytes are 0, the next 127 are 1, the next 127 are 2, the next 127 are 3 and the remaining 127+4 bytes are 0. There is `377` bytes of padding needed and so the v1 piece CID is `baga6ea4seaqn42av3szurbbscwuu3zjssvfwbpsvbjf6y3tukvlgl2nf5rha6pa` (notice it's the same as above) and the v2 is `bafkzcibd7ebalxticxolgseegik2stpfgkkuwyf6kufex3doorkvmzpjuxwe4dz4`.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure I understand why padding here would be 377 as opposed to 504. Tree height is 5 so we need to feed `(2 ** 5) * 32 / 128 * 127 = 1016` bytes into Fr32 expander. That is to say I'd expect padding to be `1016 - 128 * 4 = 503`.

Maybe I'm misunderstanding spec but `128 * 4 + 377` is `7` quads and we need one more here to form binary tree.

Reviewer 4: I am also confused... it should be neither 377 nor 504: it should be 512

```
Payload:              512 bytes
Fr32 expansion:       640 bytes ( I think )
256bit node bintree: 1024 bytes
bintree - payload:    512 bytes
```

Reviewer 2: So if payload was 512 bytes after 0 padding to 635 and Fr32 expansion we'll get 640 bytes. From that is 5 quads and nearest pow2 is 8 which will form 1024 bytes indeed.

And yes 1024 - 512 = 512, however that is not 0 padding pre Fr32 which is why my understanding of this spec is.

Reviewer 2: After some explanations in side channel I understand now that @ribasushi's version is number 0 added by both Fr32 padding and 0 padding together while mine was number of added by 0 padding.

I have minor preference for my interpretation, even if it's more complicated to calculate I find it bit more intuitive to understand. That said I'm ok with going with @ribasushi's interpretation as long as spec reflects that
